Biology is a fascinating and important subject, because it
dramatically affects our daily lives and our futures. Many
biologists are working on problems that critically affect our
lives, such as the world’s rapidly expanding population and
diseases like cancer and AIDS. The knowledge these biologists gain will be fundamental to our ability to manage the
world’s resources in a suitable manner, to prevent or cure
diseases, and to improve the quality of our lives and those
of our children and grandchildren.
Biology is one of the most successful of the “natural sciences,” explaining what our world is like. To understand
biology, you must first understand the nature of science.
The basic tool a scientist uses is thought. To understand
the nature of science, it is useful to focus for a moment on
how scientists think. They reason in two ways: deductively
and inductively.
Deductive Reasoning
Deductive reasoning applies general principles to predict
specific results. Over 2200 years ago, the Greek Eratosthenes used deductive reasoning to accurately estimate
the circumference of the earth. At high noon on the longest
day of the year, when the sun’s rays hit the bottom of a
deep well in the city of Syene, Egypt, Eratosthenes measured the length of the shadow cast by a tall obelisk in Alexandria, about 800 kilometers to the north. Because he
knew the distance between the two cities and the height of
the obelisk, he was able to employ the principles of Euclidean geometry to correctly deduce the circumference of the
earth (figure 1.3). This sort of analysis of specific cases using general principles is an example of deductive reasoning.
It is the reasoning of mathematics and philosophy and is
used to test the validity of general ideas in all branches of
knowledge. General principles are constructed and then
used as the basis for examining specific cases.
Inductive Reasoning
Inductive reasoning uses specific observations to construct
general scientific principles. Webster’s Dictionary defines science as systematized knowledge derived from observation
and experiment carried on to determine the principles underlying what is being studied. In other words, a scientist
determines principles from observations, discovering general principles by careful examination of specific cases. Inductive reasoning first became important to science in the
1600s in Europe, when Francis Bacon, Isaac Newton, and
others began to use the results of particular experiments to
infer general principles about how the world operates. If
you release an apple from your hand, what happens? The
apple falls to the ground. From a host of simple, specific
observations like this, Newton inferred a general principle:
all objects fall toward the center of the earth. What Newton did was construct a mental model of how the world
works, a family of general principles consistent with what
he could see and learn. Scientists do the same today. They
use specific observations to build general models, and then
test the models to see how well they work.
Science is a way of viewing the world that focuses on
objective information, putting that information to work
to build understanding.
1.2 Scientists form generalizations from observations.
FIGURE 1.3
Deductive reasoning: How Eratosthenes estimated the circumference of the earth using deductive reasoning. 1. On a
day when sunlight shone straight down a deep well at Syene in
Egypt, Eratosthenes measured the length of the shadow cast by a
tall obelisk in the city of Alexandria, about 800 kilometers away.
2. The shadow’s length and the obelisk’s height formed two sides
of a triangle. Using the recently developed principles of Euclidean
geometry, he calculated the angle, a, to be 7° and 12′, exactly 1
50 of
a circle (360°). 3. If angle a = 1
50 of a circle, then the distance
between the obelisk (in Alexandria) and the well (in Syene) must
equal 1
50 of the circumference of the earth. 4. Eratosthenes had
heard that it was a 50-day camel trip from Alexandria to Syene.
Assuming that a camel travels about 18.5 kilometers per day, he
estimated the distance between obelisk and well as 925 kilometers
(using different units of
measure, of course).
5. Eratosthenes thus deduced the circumference
of the earth to be 50
925  46,250
kilometers. Modern
measurements put the
distance from the well to
the obelisk at just over
800 kilometers. Employing a distance of 800
kilometers, Eratosthenes’s value would
have been 50 × 800
40,000 kilometers. The
actual circumference is
40,075 kilometers.
Sunlight
at midday
c
D
iti
is
e
t
s
anc
= 8
e
0
between
0 km
Well
Light rays
parallel
Height of
obelisk
Length of
shadow
a
a
How Science Is Done
How do scientists establish which general principles are
true from among the many that might be true? They do
this by systematically testing alternative proposals. If these
proposals prove inconsistent with experimental observations, they are rejected as untrue. After making careful observations concerning a particular area of science, scientists construct a hypothesis, which is a suggested
explanation that accounts for those observations. A hypothesis is a proposition that might be true. Those hypotheses that have not yet been disproved are retained.
They are useful because they fit the known facts, but they
are always subject to future rejection if, in the light of new
information, they are found to be incorrect.
Testing Hypotheses
We call the test of a hypothesis an experiment (figure
1.4). Suppose that a room appears dark to you. To understand why it appears dark, you propose several hypotheses.
The first might be, “There is no light in the room because
the light switch is turned off.” An alternative hypothesis
might be, “There is no light in the room because the lightbulb is burned out.” And yet another alternative hypothesis might be, “I am going blind.” To evaluate these hypotheses, you would conduct an experiment designed to
eliminate one or more of the hypotheses. For example, you
might test your hypotheses by reversing the position of the
light switch. If you do so and the light does not come on,
you have disproved the first hypothesis. Something other
than the setting of the light switch must be the reason for
the darkness. Note that a test such as this does not prove
that any of the other hypotheses are true; it merely demonstrates that one of them is not. A successful experiment
is one in which one or more of the alternative hypotheses
is demonstrated to be inconsistent with the results and is
thus rejected.
As you proceed through this text, you will encounter
many hypotheses that have withstood the test of experiment.
Many will continue to do so; others will be revised as new
observations are made by biologists. Biology, like all science,
is in a constant state of change, with new ideas appearing
and replacing old ones.
Chapter 1 The Science of Biology 7
FIGURE 1.4
How science is done. This diagram illustrates the way in which scientific investigations proceed. First, scientists
make observations that raise a
particular question. They develop a
number of potential explanations
(hypotheses) to answer the question.
Next, they carry out experiments in an
attempt to eliminate one or more of
these hypotheses. Then, predictions are
made based on the remaining
hypotheses, and further experiments
are carried out to test these predictions.
As a result of this process, the least
unlikely hypothesis is selected.
Observation
Question
Experiment
Hypothesis 1
Hypothesis 2
Hypothesis 3
Hypothesis 4
Hypothesis 5
Potential
hypotheses
Remaining
possible
hypotheses Last remaining
possible hypothesis
Reject
hypotheses
1 and 4
Reject
hypotheses
2 and 3
Experiment
Experiment 1
Hypothesis 2
Hypothesis 3
Hypothesis 5
Hypothesis 5
Predictions
Predictions
confirmed
Experiment 1 Experiment 2 Experiment 3 Experiment 4
Establishing Controls
Often we are interested in learning about processes that are
influenced by many factors, or variables. To evaluate alternative hypotheses about one variable, all other variables
must be kept constant. This is done by carrying out two experiments in parallel: in the first experiment, one variable is
altered in a specific way to test a particular hypothesis; in the
second experiment, called the control experiment, that
variable is left unaltered. In all other respects the two experiments are identical, so any difference in the outcomes of
the two experiments must result from the influence of the
variable that was changed. Much of the challenge of experimental science lies in designing control experiments that
isolate a particular variable from other factors that might influence a process.
Using Predictions
A successful scientific hypothesis needs to be not only valid
but useful—it needs to tell you something you want to
know. A hypothesis is most useful when it makes predictions, because those predictions provide a way to test the validity of the hypothesis. If an experiment produces results
inconsistent with the predictions, the hypothesis must be rejected. On the other hand, if the predictions are supported
by experimental testing, the hypothesis is supported. The
more experimentally supported predictions a hypothesis
makes, the more valid the hypothesis is. For example, Einstein’s hypothesis of relativity was at first provisionally accepted because no one could devise an experiment that invalidated it. The hypothesis made a clear prediction: that
the sun would bend the path of light passing by it. When
this prediction was tested in a total eclipse, the light from
background stars was indeed bent. Because this result was
unknown when the hypothesis was being formulated, it provided strong support for the hypothesis, which was then accepted with more confidence.
Developing Theories
Scientists use the word theory in two main ways. A “theory” is a proposed explanation for some natural phenomenon, often based on some general principle. Thus one
speaks of the principle first proposed by Newton as the
“theory of gravity.” Such theories often bring together
concepts that were previously thought to be unrelated,
and offer unified explanations of different phenomena.
Newton’s theory of gravity provided a single explanation
for objects falling to the ground and the orbits of planets
around the sun. “Theory” is also used to mean the body
of interconnected concepts, supported by scientific reasoning and experimental evidence, that explains the facts
in some area of study. Such a theory provides an indispensable framework for organizing a body of knowledge.
For example, quantum theory in physics brings together a
set of ideas about the nature of the universe, explains experimental facts, and serves as a guide to further questions
and experiments.
To a scientist, such theories are the solid ground of science, that of which we are most certain. In contrast, to the
general public, theory implies just the opposite—a lack of
knowledge, or a guess. Not surprisingly, this difference
often results in confusion. In this text, theory will always be
used in its scientific sense, in reference to an accepted general principle or body of knowledge.
To suggest, as many critics outside of science do, that
evolution is “just a theory” is misleading. The hypothesis
that evolution has occurred is an accepted scientific fact; it is
supported by overwhelming evidence. Modern evolutionary
theory is a complex body of ideas whose importance spreads
far beyond explaining evolution; its ramifications permeate
all areas of biology, and it provides the conceptual framework that unifies biology as a science.
Research and the Scientific Method
It used to be fashionable to speak of the “scientific method” as consisting of an orderly sequence of logical “either/or” steps. Each step would reject one of two mutually
incompatible alternatives, as if trial-and-error testing
would inevitably lead one through the maze of uncertainty that always impedes scientific progress. If this were indeed so, a computer would make a good scientist. But science is not done this way. As British philosopher Karl
Popper has pointed out, successful scientists without exception design their experiments with a pretty fair idea of
how the results are going to come out. They have what
Popper calls an “imaginative preconception” of what the
truth might be. A hypothesis that a successful scientist
tests is not just any hypothesis; rather, it is an educated
guess or a hunch, in which the scientist integrates all that
he or she knows and allows his or her imagination full
play, in an attempt to get a sense of what might be true
(see Box: How Biologists Do Their Work). It is because
insight and imagination play such a large role in scientific
progress that some scientists are so much better at science
than others, just as Beethoven and Mozart stand out
among most other composers.
Some scientists perform what is called basic research,
which is intended to extend the boundaries of what we
know. These individuals typically work at universities, and
their research is usually financially supported by their institutions and by external sources, such as the government,
industry, and private foundations. Basic research is as diverse as its name implies. Some basic scientists attempt to
find out how certain cells take up specific chemicals, while
others count the number of dents in tiger teeth. The information generated by basic research contributes to the
growing body of scientific knowledge, and it provides the
scientific foundation utilized by applied research. Scientists who conduct applied research are often employed in
8 Part I The Origin of Living Things
some kind of industry. Their work may involve the manufacturing of food additives, creating of new drugs, or testing the quality of the environment.
After developing a hypothesis and performing a series of
experiments, a scientist writes a paper carefully describing
the experiment and its results. He or she then submits the
paper for publication in a scientific journal, but before it is
published, it must be reviewed and accepted by other scientists who are familiar with that particular field of research.
This process of careful evaluation, called peer review, lies at
the heart of modern science, fostering careful work, precise
description, and thoughtful analysis. When an important
discovery is announced in a paper, other scientists attempt
to reproduce the result, providing a check on accuracy and
honesty. Nonreproducible results are not taken seriously